---
layout: post
title: Jekyll - Tag Cloud
tags: [jekyll]
author: yeban
---

Tag clouds are great at visually summarizing what you write about. I added one
to my blog some time back. The basic functionality is in the form of a simple
[Jekyll plugin][1]. It defines a `tag_cloud` tag which is rendered by Liquid
into a tag cloud:

{% highlight html %}
  <div class='cloud'>
    {% raw %} {% tag_cloud %} {% endraw %}
  </div>
{% endhighlight %}

The tag cloud itself is a collection of anchor tags, styled dynamically with
the `font-size` CSS property. The range of values, and unit to use for
`font-size` can be specified with a very simple syntax:

      {% raw %} {% tag_cloud font-size: 0.8 - 1.8em %} {% endraw %}

In the above example, the `font-size` varies from 0.8em for the tag with lowest
frequency, to 1.8em for the tag with highest frequency and is automatically
formatted to use one decimal place. For two decimal places we would have
specified the `font-size` argument as:

      {% raw %} {% tag_cloud font-size: 0.80 - 1.80em %} {% endraw %}

The plugin assumes a default `font-size` distribution of `70 - 170%`.

[Logarithmic distribution][2] is used to calculate the `font-size` for each
tag. The tag cloud comes out much better with a logarithmic distribution than
with a linear distribution. The difference is particularly apparent when one
tag has been used much more frequently than the other.

Tags that have been used less than a certain number of times can be filtered
out from the tag cloud with the optional `threshold` parameter:

      {% raw %} {% tag_cloud threshold: 2%} {% endraw %}

So the previous tag cloud will only have tags with a frequency greater than or
equal to two. The default value for `threshold` is one.

Both the parameters can be clubbed together ofcourse:

      {% raw %} {% tag_cloud font-size: 50 - 100%, threshold: 2%} {% endraw %}

The links in the tag cloud point to a [tags page][3] that enumerates all tags,
and their corresponding posts. I found this approach to be much simpler than
writing a Jekyll Generator plugin to generate index page for each tag.

I tried to animate the tag cloud too, using jQuery, but wasn't very successful.
I will probably give it another go sometime later. For the time being, I tried
to compensate for the lack of animation by randomizing the order of the tags
every time the tag cloud is generated. Not the brightest idea, I know, but I
like the result.

[1]: https://github.com/yeban/weblog/blob/master/_plugins/tag_cloud.rb
[2]: http://dburke.info/blog/logarithmic-tag-clouds/
[3]: http://yeban.in/tags.html
